# Use static typing where available

## Summary

Static typing can help prevent programming mistakes and bugs by making sure
methods are only returning, or being passed, the types of data they expect.
Since static typing is available in some form in all of our supported languages
– optionally in Ruby, Python and PHP, in JavaScript via the use of TypeScript,
and inherently in the language in Kotlin and C# – we should make use of static
typing where available.

## Problem

In programming, every piece of data has a type. For example, whole numbers are
integers, and a series of characters is a string. Generally speaking any method
can only accept some of these types - for example it doesn't make sense to
multiply two strings, or to capitalise an integer.

dxw predominantly programs in what are known as dynamically typed languages,
where the types of data only become relevant when they are used at run-time.
This means situations can arise where an unexpected type of data can be passed
into an argument, for example through uncaught errors or user input, which can
cause unexpected behaviour or outright failures.

By making use of static typing we can explicitly declare which types of data
methods are expected to return, and which types of data they accept as
arguments. Type checking (at compile-time for compiled languages, and via
separate tooling for uncompiled) can then make sure that no situation arises in
the code where data is either returned or passed in an unsupported type.

Although this doesn't guarantee bug-free programming, and does not replace the
need for testing or peer review, it does offer guard rails against some common
mistakes and encourages consideration of exactly what types of data any piece of
code will be expected to handle.

## Proposal

Where a language either includes support for static typing or where tooling
exists to ensure it, new projects SHOULD make use of static typing.

If an existing project is in a language which supports optional or partial
typing, you MAY choose to add static typing only to parts of the codebase as
they are modified.

Where static typing is used, any automated test pipeline MUST make sure that
types are checked.

## Next steps

- [ ] Update language templates to include type checking as part of their test
      process
